In this section, we're going to focus on Spanning Tree, which is a Layer 2 technology which prevents
loops across your Layer 2 switched network.
But before we get into that, I want to do a review of how network redundancy, and our path selection,
and loop prevention works at Layer 3. At Layer 3, routing and HSRP control the path selection and provide
automatic failover for our Layer 3 connections.
You see the network topology diagram here,
I'm going to be using this throughout this section, and the routers up at the top, so R1, R2,
SP1, and SP2 at the service providers,
they've all got Layer 3 connections between them.
There's also a Layer 3 connection going from R1 and R2, down to the end hosts, PC1 and PC2 at
the bottom. But our switches, so CD1, the Core Distribution Switch 1, CD2, and our Access
Layer switches, Acc3 and Acc4, they are Layer 2 only switches. So this first lecture,
we're going to be talking about those Layer 3 connections.
So looking at the path selection, which is controlled by our rotuing, for this example, I'm just going
to use static routes.
But if we were using a dynamic routing protocol, it would work pretty much the same as this. So my first
route on R1,
I'm going to have a default static route for all traffic going out to the Internet, which points at SP1,
my Service Provider (SP) router that is directly attached to R1. The command that use is 'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 203.0.113.1',
the next hop address on SP1.
And because this is a static route, it has a default Administrative Distance of 1.
Now, I want to have a redundant route here as well.
I've put in redundant network devices, so I don't have any single points of failure.
So if that link between R1 up to SP1 goes down, I need to be able to route around the failure.
So, I've got a backup route for that on R1.
My command is 'ip route
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0'
and the next hop address is 10.10.20.2.
Whenever you configure a backup route, it needs to be pointing to the same subnet as the main route was.
So that's why they're both going to 0.0.0.0
with a /0 mask. This route points to R2, rather than SP1
and to make a backup for the primary route, I give it an Administrative Distance of 5. With Administrative
Distance, that controls which will be the preferred route, with the lower number being the better.
So my first route has got an AD of 1, the route is going to SP1 will be preferred. If that route goes
down, for example, because the SP1 router or the linked to SP1 goes down, then this route will
take over in the routing table.
So, that gives me redundancy for my northbound traffic.
The reason the traffic works via R2 is the R2 is going to have a similar configuration to R1.
So R2 has got its primary default
route
pointing at SP2, the service provider router that it's directly connected to. R2 will have a mirror backup route
pointing back towards R1.
I also need to have reachability and failover for my southbound traffic going down towards my PCs.
Well if you look at R1, its gigabitEthernet 0/1
interface has got an IP address 10.10.10.2. It's in the same subnet as the PCs,
so it is directly connected to the 10.10.10.0 subnet,
and whenever an interface is directly connected, it goes into the routing table as a Connected route
with an Administrative Distance of 0,
so it will always be the preferred route to get to that network.
I want to have redundancy to get down to my PCs in case the link going downstream to my CD1
switch goes down.
So for that, I'm going to have a backup route pointing towards R2
again. My configuration there is
'ip route 10.10.10.0 255.255.255.0' and the next hop address on R2 of 10.10.20.2.
This is a static route, so it has the default Administrative Distance of 1, which is not as good
as the connected interfaces, AD of 0,
so this will function as a backup route.
Okay, so that was how I did my configuration on R1, R2 is going to have similar configuration
as this as well.
So, I've got redundancy going northbound and southbound through my R1 and R2 routers.
Now, looking at things from the point of view of the PCs, they've got two gateways available on the
10.10.10.0/24 network. There's R1 at 10.10.10.2, and there's R2 at 10.10.10.3
I want to have just one IP address to use as the default gateway on my PCs,
so I'm going to configure HSRP on my R1 and R2 routers.
This is configured at the interface level, and its interface gigEthernet0/1 which is facing down
towards the PCs on both routers.
So on R1, on interface gigEthernet0/1, I give it its physical IP address of 10.10.10.2, 'no shutdown',
and then I say 'standby 1 ip 10.10.10.1'.
That is the HSRP configuration that uses a virtual IP (VIP) address of 10.10.10.1. On R2,
I give it physical address 10.10.10.3, and it also has that shared virtual IP address
of 10.10.10.1.
I haven't configured priority and pre-emption for this example, so the highest IP address will default to
being the active HSRP gateway, that is on R2 because it's 10.10.10.3.
So all of the PCs will use R2 as their active default gateway,
R1 is going to be the spare.
If R2 or the link to R2 from CD2 goes down, then R1 will detect that and R1 will transition
to being the active gateway, and now all our traffic going northbound from our PCs will go via R1.
Okay, so that is how we configure our routing and our redundancy and failover when we've got redundant
devices in a Layer 3 network.
Now, it is possible that we could make a misconfiguration here and create a routing loop.
So, let's have a look at how that can happen.
So here we've added a static route on R1 for 10.10.50.0/24 with the next hop address of 203.0.113.1 on SP1,
and then on SP1,
we add an IP route also for the 10.10.50.0 network with the next hop address of 203.0.113.10 on SP2.
SP2 routes it to R2 with IP address next hop 203.0.113.6,
and on R2, we're routing traffic for 10.10.50.0 to R1 with the next hop address
of 10.10.20.1.
So you've see we've created a Layer 3 routing loop here, and what would happen would be if traffic gets
sent into R1 or any of these routers with the next hop address of the 10.10.50.0
network, it's going to start looping around those routers. But it's not going to loop forever
because in the IP header, we've got the Time To Live field, the TTL.
The way that the TTL works is every time that a packet passes through a router, it will decrement the TTL
value by 1. And if the TTL gets down to 0, the router will drop the traffic.
So let's see how this fixes our loop,
so a packet has come into R1 with a destination address, let's say  10.1.50.10, and it currently
has a TTL of 5.
So R1 will route it to SP1, it gets to SP1. SP1 will forward it to SP2 and it will decrement
the TTL to 4. SP2 forwards it to R2, the TTL is decremented
to 3. R2 sends it to R1, TTL goes to 2, and R1 will then send it back to SP1
and decrement the TTl to 1. When it comes into SP1,
if it was going to forward on again, it would decrement the TTL to 0.
So it won't do that, it will drop the packet here and it will send an ICMP time exceeded message back
to R1 to let it know the packet was dropped.
Okay, so you've seen it at
Layer 3, our standard Layer 3 routing and HSRP will control the path selection and provide automatic
failover for our Layer 3 connections when we've got redundant devices.
Dynamic routing protocols have built in loop prevention mechanisms.
So that example I showed you there, where I deliberately created a routing loop with static routes,
when you're using dynamic routing protocols, that shouldn't really be possible to happen because they've
got built in loop prevention mechanisms,
but the TTL is there in the IP header to act as a final failsafe in case a loop does somehow get created.
Okay, so that's how things work at
Layer 3.
In the next lecture, we'll start taking a look at how path selection, failover, and loop prevention is going
to work for our Layer 2 only switches in our network example.